README.md, before:

# dualq_kinematics

This repository is a ROS2 C++ package aiming to become a MoveIt2 kinematics plugin using "**dual quaternions**". In Robotics, the Denavit-Hartenberg convention and homogeneous transformation matrices are commonly used to solve forward and inverse kinematics. 

However, modern approaches use the **product of exponential** and dual quaternions can be used in this context as they can represent homogeneous transformation and screw displacements. [Wikipedia link on Screw Axis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Screw_axis)

This second approach requires fewer arithmetic operations and is therefore faster. For example, this is particularly usefull when forward kinematics is used in an optimization problem needing a huge number of forward kinematics computations to converge. Also dual quaternions are more compact than a transformation matrix

The package is based on ROS2 Humble. In this repository, the dual quaternions is built using Eigen library, to ensure compatbility with MoveIt and others. It means that the dual quaternion class has 2 `Eigen::Quaternion` as members and that the constructors take Eigen types as inputs. The `DualQuaternion` and `ScrewCoordinates` classes are templates to follow Eigen's logic.

---

## Dual quaternions

A dual quaternion is composed of two quaternions, one is called the real part and the other the dual part. The dual quaternion is the extension of quaternions to dual numbers.

### **Forward Kinematics**

Generally, the product of exponential states that

$`T_{Tip}^0  = ({\Pi}_{0}^n \  e^{(\^{\xi_n} * {\theta}_{n})}) * T_{Tip}^0 (0)`$

where $`\^{\xi_n}`$ is a **twist** and $`\underline{\theta}`$ is a vector of joint angles and  $`T_{Tip}^0(0)`$ is **tip2Base** transform when the manipulator is at rest

**Twist**: *"A twist can be represented as a normalized screw axis, a representation of the direction of the motion, multiplied by a scalar speed along the screw axis"* (Northwestern University)

**Screw axis** are characterized by the axis expressed in a frame and a position of a point on it, they can represent the joints of a robot. In this method, the screw axes information are used rather than the Denavit-Hartenberg parameters

When using dual quaternions in this context, it is needed to:
- Define screw axes [1]
- Apply motion to them using the **dual angle** [1]
- Use the product of exponentials

Let's keep in mind that dual quaternions multiplication and exponential are defined in [1] and [2]

### **Inverse Kinematics** 

Inverse kinematics can be computed by dividing the forward kinematics equation into so-called Paden-Kahan sub-problems: [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paden%E2%80%93Kahan_subproblems)

---

## Status of the project

This repository has:
- ✅ A library enabling construction and operations on dual quaternions
- ✅ The capability of getting screw coordinates out of a MoveIt robot (defined by an URDF)
- ✅ Compute forward kinematics (through the use of dual quaternion exponential and multiplication)

The following is currently under development:
- Enhance Performance
- Adding Paden-Kahan subproblems handling with dual quaternions (for inverse kinematics)
- Adding Inverse Kinematics solution for 6DOF
- Adding redundancy resolution to handle 7DOF
- Make the plugin out of the package

--- 

## Prerequesites

- Install ROS2 Humble
- Install MoveIt2

---

## Getting Started

```bash
source /opt/ros/humble/setup.bash
git clone https://github.com/thomasphilip6/dualq_kinematics.git
cd dualq_kinematics
colcon build 
source install/setup.bash
``` 

The demo can then be launched:

```bash
ros2 launch dualq_kinematics dualq_kinematics_demo.launch.py
``` 

And in the output, you can see the forward kinematics being computed correctly:
```bash
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] [INFO] [1765644724.015255894] [dualq_kinematics_demo]: MoveIt FK Returned : 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] [INFO] [1765644724.015273387] [dualq_kinematics_demo]: Translation: 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1]  0.358409
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] -0.773386
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1]  0.407073
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] [INFO] [1765644724.015294978] [dualq_kinematics_demo]: Rotation: 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] -0.582924 -0.554271  0.594124
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] -0.782642  0.186534 -0.593866
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1]  0.218338 -0.811165 -0.542531
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] [INFO] [1765644724.015379736] [dualq_kinematics_demo]: Translation: 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1]  0.358409
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] -0.773386
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1]  0.407073
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] [INFO] [1765644724.015400816] [dualq_kinematics_demo]: Rotation: 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] -0.582924 -0.554271  0.594124
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] -0.782642  0.186534 -0.593866
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1]  0.218338 -0.811165 -0.542531
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] [INFO] [1765644724.015412398] [dualq_kinematics_demo]: Dual Quaternions FK and MoveIt FK match: 1
```

---

## Testing 

To run DualQuaternion class unit tests:

```bash
./build/dualq_kinematics_DualQuaternionTest
```

To run ScrewCoordinates class integration (a MoveIt Robot is passed) tests:

```bash
launch_test test/launch/ScrewCoordinates.test.py
```
---

## Debugging


Build the code in debug mode and follow ros2 humble documentation on the topic:

```bash
colcon build --packages-up-to <package_name> --cmake-args -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug
```

To debug ScrewCoordinates, uncomment the commented line in `ScrewCoordinates.test.py`:

```python
screw_coordinates_node =  launch_ros.actions.Node(
            package="dualq_kinematics",
            executable="dualq_kinematics_ScrewCoordinatesTest",
            #Uncomment following line to debug with gdb
            #prefix=['gdb -ex run --args'],
            parameters=[
                moveit_config,
                test_param,
            ],
            output="screen",
)
``` 
---

### References

- [1] Dual Quaternions by Yan-Bin Jia
- [2] Practical Exponential Coordinates using Implicit Dual Quaternions by Neil T. Dantam
- [3] Robust and efﬁcient forward, differential, and inverse kinematics using dual quaternions by Neil T. Dantam
- [4] Analytical Solution for Inverse Kinematics Using Dual Quaternions by Ping-Feng Lin, Ming-Bao Huang, and Han-Pang Huang, Member, IEEE

todo: complete this part

---

Commit message:

docs: add compile instructions and computation times testing

README.md, after:

# dualq_kinematics

This repository is a ROS2 C++ package aiming to become a MoveIt2 kinematics plugin using "**dual quaternions**". In Robotics, the Denavit-Hartenberg convention and homogeneous transformation matrices are commonly used to solve forward and inverse kinematics. 

However, modern approaches use the **product of exponential** and dual quaternions can be used in this context as they can represent homogeneous transformation and screw displacements. [Wikipedia link on Screw Axis](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Screw_axis)

This second approach requires fewer arithmetic operations and is therefore faster. For example, this is particularly usefull when forward kinematics is used in an optimization problem needing a huge number of forward kinematics computations to converge. Also dual quaternions are more compact than a transformation matrix. Computations of the forward kinematics of the Franka Emika robot (7DOF) are **under the microsecond**.

The package is based on ROS2 Humble. In this repository, the dual quaternions is built using Eigen library, to ensure compatbility with MoveIt and others. It means that the dual quaternion class has 2 `Eigen::Quaternion` as members and that the constructors take Eigen types as inputs. The `DualQuaternion` and `ScrewCoordinates` classes are templates to follow Eigen's logic. 

---

## Dual quaternions

A dual quaternion is composed of two quaternions, one is called the real part and the other the dual part. The dual quaternion is the extension of quaternions to dual numbers.

### **Forward Kinematics**

Generally, the product of exponential states that

$`T_{Tip}^0  = ({\Pi}_{0}^n \  e^{({\^{\xi_n}} * {\theta}_{n})}) * T_{Tip}^0 (0)`$

where $`{\^{\xi_n}}`$ is a **twist** and $`\underline{\theta}`$ is a vector of joint angles and  $`T_{Tip}^0(0)`$ is **tip2Base** transform when the manipulator is at rest

**Twist**: *"A twist can be represented as a normalized screw axis, a representation of the direction of the motion, multiplied by a scalar speed along the screw axis"* (Northwestern University)

**Screw axis** are characterized by the axis expressed in a frame and a position of a point on it, they can represent the joints of a robot. In this method, the screw axes information are used rather than the Denavit-Hartenberg parameters

When using dual quaternions in this context, it is needed to:
- Define screw axes [1]
- Apply motion to them using the **dual angle** [1]
- Use the product of exponentials

Let's keep in mind that dual quaternions multiplication and exponential are defined in [1] and [2]

### **Inverse Kinematics** 

Inverse kinematics can be computed by dividing the forward kinematics equation into so-called Paden-Kahan sub-problems: [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paden%E2%80%93Kahan_subproblems)

---

## Status of the project

This repository has:
- ✅ A library enabling construction and operations on dual quaternions
- ✅ The capability of getting screw coordinates out of a MoveIt robot (defined by an URDF)
- ✅ Compute forward kinematics (through the use of dual quaternion exponential and multiplication)

The following is currently under development:
- Adding Paden-Kahan subproblems handling with dual quaternions (for inverse kinematics)
- Adding Inverse Kinematics solution for 6DOF
- Adding redundancy resolution to handle 7DOF
- Make the plugin out of the package

--- 

## Prerequesites

- Install ROS2 Humble
- Install MoveIt2

---

## Getting Started

```bash
source /opt/ros/humble/setup.bash
git clone https://github.com/thomasphilip6/dualq_kinematics.git
cd dualq_kinematics
colcon build 
source install/setup.bash
``` 

The demo can then be launched:

```bash
ros2 launch dualq_kinematics dualq_kinematics_demo.launch.py
``` 

And in the output, you can see the forward kinematics being computed correctly:
```bash
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] [INFO] [1765644724.015255894] [dualq_kinematics_demo]: MoveIt FK Returned : 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] [INFO] [1765644724.015273387] [dualq_kinematics_demo]: Translation: 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1]  0.358409
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] -0.773386
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1]  0.407073
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] [INFO] [1765644724.015294978] [dualq_kinematics_demo]: Rotation: 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] -0.582924 -0.554271  0.594124
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] -0.782642  0.186534 -0.593866
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1]  0.218338 -0.811165 -0.542531
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] [INFO] [1765644724.015379736] [dualq_kinematics_demo]: Translation: 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1]  0.358409
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] -0.773386
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1]  0.407073
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] [INFO] [1765644724.015400816] [dualq_kinematics_demo]: Rotation: 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] -0.582924 -0.554271  0.594124
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] -0.782642  0.186534 -0.593866
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1]  0.218338 -0.811165 -0.542531
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] 
[dualq_kinematics_demo-1] [INFO] [1765644724.015412398] [dualq_kinematics_demo]: Dual Quaternions FK and MoveIt FK match: 1
```

Make sure to compile in release mode to get the fastest computation times `--cmake-args -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release` 
```bash
[dualq_kinematics_demo]: Dual Quaternions FK took (over 1000 tries) 0.607738 us.
```

---

## Testing 

To run DualQuaternion class unit tests:

```bash
./build/dualq_kinematics_DualQuaternionTest
```

To run ScrewCoordinates class integration (a MoveIt Robot is passed) tests:

```bash
launch_test test/launch/ScrewCoordinates.test.py
```
---

## Debugging


Build the code in debug mode and follow ros2 humble documentation on the topic:

```bash
colcon build --packages-up-to <package_name> --cmake-args -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Debug
```

To debug ScrewCoordinates, uncomment the commented line in `ScrewCoordinates.test.py`:

```python
screw_coordinates_node =  launch_ros.actions.Node(
            package="dualq_kinematics",
            executable="dualq_kinematics_ScrewCoordinatesTest",
            #Uncomment following line to debug with gdb
            #prefix=['gdb -ex run --args'],
            parameters=[
                moveit_config,
                test_param,
            ],
            output="screen",
)
``` 
---

### References

- [1] Dual Quaternions by Yan-Bin Jia
- [2] Practical Exponential Coordinates using Implicit Dual Quaternions by Neil T. Dantam
- [3] Robust and efﬁcient forward, differential, and inverse kinematics using dual quaternions by Neil T. Dantam
- [4] Analytical Solution for Inverse Kinematics Using Dual Quaternions by Ping-Feng Lin, Ming-Bao Huang, and Han-Pang Huang, Member, IEEE

todo: complete this part

---
